[docs] Batch16 - Quantiles (#6)
edgar2020/druid: docs/querying/sql-functions.md

## APPROX_QUANTILE

:::info
Deprecated in favor of [`APPROX_QUANTILE_DS`](#approx_quantile_ds).
:::

> * **Syntax:** `APPROX_QUANTILE(expr, fraction, [k])`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Syntax:** `APPROX_QUANTILE(expr, probability, [k])`
```
Changed `fraction` to `probability` to match what's in [Quantiles sketch functions](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/querying/sql-aggregations/#quantiles-sketch-functions).

* **Function type:** Aggregation

[Learn more](sql-aggregations.md)

## APPROX_QUANTILE_DS

> Computes approximate quantiles on a Quantiles sketch column or a regular numeric column. The parameter `k` determines the accuracy and size of the sketch. The [DataSketches Quantiles Sketch module](../development/extensions-core/datasketches-quantiles.md) provides more information on the parameter `k`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Computes approximate quantiles on a Quantiles sketch column or a regular numeric column. See [DataSketches Quantiles Sketch module](../development/extensions-core/datasketches-quantiles.md) for a description of parameters.
```

> * **Syntax:** `APPROX_QUANTILE_DS(expr, fraction, [k])`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Syntax:** `APPROX_QUANTILE_DS(expr, probability, [k])`
```
Changed `fraction` to `probability` to match what's in [Quantiles sketch functions](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/querying/sql-aggregations/#quantiles-sketch-functions).

* **Function type:** Aggregation

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example approximates the median of the `Distance` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource using a `k` value of 128. The query may return a different approximation on each execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example approximates the median of the `Distance` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource. The query may return a different approximation on each execution.
```

```sql
SELECT APPROX_QUANTILE_DS("Distance", 0.5, 128)  AS "estimate_median"
FROM "flight-carriers"
```

> May return the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Returns a result similar to the following:
```

| `estimate_median` |
| -- | 
| `569` |

</details>

[Learn more](sql-aggregations.md)

## APPROX_QUANTILE_FIXED_BUCKETS

> Computes approximate quantiles on fixed buckets histogram column or a regular numeric column. The [fixed buckets histogram](../development/extensions-core/approximate-histograms.md#fixed-buckets-histogram) documentation describes the parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Computes approximate quantiles on fixed buckets histogram column or a regular numeric column. See [Fixed buckets histogram](../development/extensions-core/approximate-histograms.md#fixed-buckets-histogram) for a description of parameters.
```

* **Syntax:** `APPROX_QUANTILE_FIXED_BUCKETS(expr, probability, numBuckets, lowerLimit, upperLimit, [outlierHandlingMode])`
* **Function type:** Aggregation

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example approximates the median of a histogram on the `Distance` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource. The histogram has 10 buckets, a lower limit of zero, an upper limit of 2500, and outliers are ignored. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example approximates the median of a histogram on the `Distance` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource. The histogram has 10 buckets, a lower limit of zero, an upper limit of 2500, and ignores outlier values. 
```

## DS_CDF

Returns a string representing an approximation to the cumulative distribution function given a list of split points that define the edges of the bins from a Quantiles sketch.  

* **Syntax:** `DS_CDF(expr, splitPoint0, splitPoint1, ...)`
* **Function type:** Scalar, sketch

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example specifies three split points to return cumulative distribution function approximations on the `Distance` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource. The query may return a different approximation for each bin on each execution.

```sql 
SELECT DS_CDF( DS_QUANTILES_SKETCH("Distance"), 750, 1500, 2250) AS "estimate_cdf"
FROM "flight-carriers"
```

> May return the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Returns a result similar to the following:

| `estimate_cdf` | 
| -- |
| `[0.6332237016416492,0.8908411023460711,0.9612303007393957,1.0]` |

</details>

[Learn more](sql-scalar.md#sketch-functions)

## DS_GET_QUANTILE

> Returns the quantile estimate corresponding to `fraction` from a Quantiles sketch. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns the quantile estimate corresponding to the fraction from a Quantiles sketch. 
```

* **Syntax:** `DS_GET_QUANTILE(expr, fraction)`
* **Function type:** Scalar, sketch

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example approximates the median of the `Distance` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource. The query may return a different approximation with each execution.

```sql
SELECT DS_GET_QUANTILE( DS_QUANTILES_SKETCH("Distance"), 0.5) AS "estimate_median"
FROM "flight-carriers"
```

> May return the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Returns a result similar to the following:
```

| `estimate_median` |
| -- | 
| `569` |

</details>

[Learn more](sql-scalar.md#sketch-functions)

## DS_GET_QUANTILES

Returns a string representing an array of quantile estimates corresponding to a list of fractions from a Quantiles sketch. 

* **Syntax:** `DS_GET_QUANTILES(expr, fraction0, fraction1, ...)`
* **Function type:** Scalar, sketch

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example approximates the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the `Distance` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource. The query may return a different approximation for each percentile on each execution.

```sql 
SELECT DS_GET_QUANTILES( DS_QUANTILES_SKETCH("Distance"), 0.25, 0.5, 0.75) AS "estimate_fractions"
FROM "flight-carriers"
```

> May returns the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Returns a result similar to the following:
```

| `estimate_fractions` |
| -- | 
| `[316.0,571.0,951.0]` |

</details>

[Learn more](sql-scalar.md#sketch-functions)

## DS_HISTOGRAM

> Returns a string representing an approximation to the histogram given a list of split points that define the histogram bins from a Quantiles sketch. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns an approximation to the histogram from a Quantiles sketch. The split points define the histogram bins. 
```

* **Syntax:** `DS_HISTOGRAM(expr, splitPoint0, splitPoint1, ...)`
* **Function type:** Scalar, sketch

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example specifies three split points to approximate a histogram on the `Distance` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource. The query may return a different approximation for each bin on each execution.

```sql
SELECT DS_HISTOGRAM( DS_QUANTILES_SKETCH("Distance"), 750, 1500, 2250) AS "estimate_histogram"
FROM "flight-carriers"

```

> May return the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Returns a result similar to the following:
```

| `estimate_histogram` | 
| -- |

> | `[354396.0,150199.00000000003,39848.000000000015,21694.99999999997]` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `[358496.0,153974.99999999997,39909.99999999999,13757.000000000005]` |
```

## DS_QUANTILE_SUMMARY

Returns a string summary of a Quantiles sketch. 
* **Syntax:** `DS_QUANTILE_SUMMARY(expr)`
* **Function type:** Scalar, sketch

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example returns a summary of a Quantiles sketch on the `Distance` column from the `flight-carriers`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example returns a summary of a Quantiles sketch on the `Distance` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource.
```

```sql
SELECT DS_QUANTILE_SUMMARY( DS_QUANTILES_SKETCH("Distance") ) AS "summary"
FROM "flight-carriers"
```

Returns the following:

<table>
<tr>
<td><code>summary</code></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

```
### Quantiles DirectCompactDoublesSketch SUMMARY: 
   Empty                        : false
   Memory, Capacity bytes       : true, 6128
   Estimation Mode              : true
   K                            : 128
   N                            : 566,138
   Levels (Needed, Total, Valid): 12, 12, 5
   Level Bit Pattern            : 100010100011
   BaseBufferCount              : 122
   Combined Buffer Capacity     : 762
   Retained Items               : 762
   Compact Storage Bytes        : 6,128
   Updatable Storage Bytes      : 14,368
   Normalized Rank Error        : 1.406%
   Normalized Rank Error (PMF)  : 1.711%
   Min Item                     : 2.400000e+01
   Max Item                     : 4.962000e+03
### END SKETCH SUMMARY
```

</td>
</tr>
</table>

</details>

[Learn more](sql-scalar.md#sketch-functions)

## DS_QUANTILES_SKETCH

> Creates a Quantiles sketch on a column containing Quantiles sketches or a regular column. The parameter `k` determines the accuracy and size of the sketch. The [DataSketches Quantiles Sketch module](../development/extensions-core/datasketches-quantiles.md) provides more information on the parameter `k`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creates a Quantiles sketch on a Quantiles sketch column or a regular column. See [DataSketches Quantiles Sketch module](../development/extensions-core/datasketches-quantiles.md) for a description of parameters.
```

* **Syntax:** `DS_QUANTILES_SKETCH(expr, [k])`
* **Function type:** Aggregation

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example creates a Quantile sketch on the `Distance` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource.

```sql
SELECT DS_QUANTILES_SKETCH("Distance") AS "quantile_sketch"
FROM "flight-carriers"
```

Returns the following:

| `quantile_sketch` | 
| -- | 
| `AgMIGoAAAAB6owgAA...` |

</details>

[Learn more](sql-aggregations.md)

## DS_RANK

> Returns an approximate rank for `value` between zero and one, in which the rank signifies the fraction of the distribution less than `value`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns an approximate rank of a given value in a distribution. The rank represents the fraction of the distribution less than the given value.
```

* **Syntax:** `DS_RANK(expr, value)`
* **Function type:** Scalar, sketch

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example approximates what fraction of records have a lesser value than `500` in the `Distance` column from the `flight-carries` datasource. The query may return a different approximation on each execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example estimates the fraction of records in the `flight-carriers` datasource where the value in the `Distance` column is less than 500. The query may return a different approximation on each execution.
```

```sql
SELECT DS_RANK( DS_QUANTILES_SKETCH("Distance"), 500) AS "estimate_rank"
FROM "flight-carriers"
```

> May return the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Returns a result similar to the following:
```

| `estimate_rank` |
| -- |

> | `0.43791089804959216` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `0.43837721544923675 ` |
```

**Function type:** [Scalar, sketch](sql-scalar.md#tuple-sketch-functions)

> Computes approximate sums of the values contained within a Tuple sketch which contains an array of double values as the Summary Object. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Computes approximate sums of the values contained within a Tuple sketch which contains an array of double values as the Summary Object.
```
